Operating Systems

    Syllabus
    Course materials
    Information for supervisors

Principal lecturer: Dr Martin Kleppmann
Taken by: Part IA CST
Term: Lent
Hours: 12
Format: In-person lectures
Suggested hours of supervisions: 3
Prerequisites: Digital Electronics
This course is a prerequisite for: Cloud Computing, Concurrent and Distributed Systems, Unix Tools
Exam: Paper 2 Question 3, 4
Past exam questions, Moodle, timetable
Aims

The overall aim of this course is to provide a general understanding of the structure and key functions of the operating system. Case studies will be used to illustrate and reinforce fundamental concepts.
Lectures

    Introduction to operating systems. Elementary computer organisaton. Abstract view of an operating system. Key concepts: layering, multiplexing, performance, caching, buffering, policies versus mechanisms. OS evolution: multi-programming, time-sharing. Booting. [1 lecture]
    Protection. Dual-mode operation. Protecting CPU, memory, I/O, storage. Kernels, micro-kernels, and modules. System calls. Virtual machines and containers. Subjects and objects. Authentication. Access matrix: ACLs and capabilities. Covert channels. [1 lecture]
    Processes. Job/process concepts. Process lifecycle. Process management. Context switching. Inter-process communication. [1 lecture]
    Scheduling. CPU-I/O burst cycle. Scheduling basics: preemption and non-preemption. Scheduling algorithms: FCFS, SJF, SRTF, Priority, and Round Robin. Multilevel scheduling. [2 lectures]
    Memory management. Processes in memory. Logical versus physical addresses. Partitions: static versus dynamic, free space management, external fragmentation. Segmented memory. Paged memory: concepts, internal fragmentation, page tables. Demand paging/segmentation. Page replacement strategies: FIFO, OPT, and LRU with approximations including NRU, LFU, MFU, MRU. Working set schemes. Thrashing. [3 lectures]
    I/O subsystem. General structure. Polled mode versus interrupt-driven I/O. Programmed I/O (PIO) versus Direct Memory Access (DMA). Application I/O interface: block and character devices, buffering, blocking, non-blocking, asynchronous, and vectored I/O. Other issues: caching, scheduling, spooling, performance. [1 lecture]
    File management. File concept. Directory and storage services. File names and metadata. Directory name-space: hierarchies, DAGs, hard and soft links. File operations. Access control. Existence and concurrency control. [1 lecture]
    Unix case study. History. General structure. Unix file system: file abstraction, directories, mount points, implementation details. Processes: memory image, lifecycle, start of day. The shell: basic operation, commands, standard I/O, redirection, pipes, signals. Character and block I/O. Process scheduling. [2 lectures]

Objectives

At the end of the course students should be able to:

    describe the general structure and purpose of an operating system;
    explain the concepts of process, address space, and file;
    compare and contrast various CPU scheduling algorithms;
    compare and contrast mechanisms involved in memory and storage management;
    compare and contrast polled, interrupt-driven, and DMA-based access to I/O devices.

Recommended reading

* Silberschatz, A., Galvin, P.C., and Gagne, G. (2018). Operating systems concepts. Wiley (10th ed.). Prior editions, at least back to 8th ed., should also be acceptable.
Anderson, T. and Dahlin, M. (2014). Operating Systems: Principles and Practice. Recursive Books (2nd ed.).
Bacon, J. and Harris, T. (2003). Operating systems. Addison-Wesley (3rd ed.). Currently appears out-of-print.
Leffler, S. (1989). The design and implementation of the 4.3BSD Unix operating system. Addison-Wesley.
McKusick, M.K., Neville-Neil, G.N. and Watson, R.N.M. (2014) The Design and Implementation of the FreeBSD Operating System. Pearson Education. (2nd ed.).

